Greetings, brothers and sisters!
Our next music-video presentation
is about to begin.
As you watch it, please reflect
on how you can imitate
the faith of your brothers and sisters.
Please enjoy the presentation.
Welcome to this session
of our “Powerful by Faith!” Convention,
which corresponds
to the Sunday morning session
on your printed program.
The theme is Jesus’ promise
recorded at Matthew 21:21,
which says in part:
“If you have faith . . . , it will happen.”
We invite you to sing together
song number 137,
“Faithful Women, Christian Sisters.”
Again, that’s song number 137.
Sadly, some consider women
as being inferior to men and of little worth.
How untrue!
As we’ll see in this eight-part symposium,
there is much that we can learn
from women of faith.
Each speaker will introduce
the one to follow.
To begin, let’s give our attention
to Brother Kenneth Cook,
a member of the Governing Body,
as he presents the talk entitled
“Imitate Women of Strong Faith!—Sarah.”
In our life experience,
there are many people we do not forget
—both good and bad.
But those we delight to call to mind,
or remember,
are the people most important
and most loved to us.
This is true of Jehovah as well.
He knows everyone who has ever lived
—righteous and unrighteous—
and he will resurrect millions of them.
But what he finds the greatest delight in
is remembering those with strong faith
who became his friends,
including many faithful women.
His Word is filled with accounts of women
who had strong faith.
This symposium will consider
faithful women from the past
with various backgrounds.
We will learn why they needed faith,
how they showed faith,
and how all of us can imitate their faith.
We begin with the faithful woman, Sarah.
Sarah needed faith.
Why?
Well, because like her husband, Abraham,
Sarah accepted a nomadic lifestyle
when Jehovah directed them to do so.
Hebrews 11:8 says of Abraham
that “by faith [he] . . . obeyed
by going out to a place
“[that] he was to receive
as an inheritance . . . ,
although not knowing where he was going.”
What was true for Abraham
was true for Sarah as well.
Along with Abraham, she complied
with Jehovah’s direction
and she left the prosperous city of Ur.
She no doubt had
to leave behind her relatives
as well as material advantages.
We read at Genesis 12:1
that Abraham was told:
“Go out from your land
and away from your relatives.”
Such moves are never easy.
Actually, moving is known to be
one of the most stressful things
that people must do at times,
especially when it involves moving away
from friends and relatives.
Yes, Sarah needed faith, and she had it.
She cooperated with her husband’s direction,
which meant accepting
a completely different way of life.
Her obedience revealed
her strong faith in Jehovah.
As you watch the following video,
imagine the challenges that Sarah faced.
Life in Ur was comfortable.
We had all the modern conveniences.
Then Jehovah gave us
an assignment we never expected
—one that meant saying goodbye
to the life we loved.
But rather than look behind,
Abraham and I looked ahead.
We had seen Jehovah’s hand in our lives,
and we knew he would be with us
every step of the journey.
And he was in ways that surprised us
—ways we never could have imagined.
Jehovah did more than help us;
he fulfilled his every promise.
As accurately depicted in that video,
how did Sarah show faith?
She showed faith by looking ahead.
She also reflected on what Jehovah
had already done for them.
Abraham and Sarah had seen
Jehovah’s hand in their lives.
They were his friends.
They had obeyed before,
and Jehovah had confidence
in their obedience now.
As a woman of strong faith,
Sarah trusted that Jehovah would continue
to be with them in their new assignment.
She willingly gave up the comforts
and conveniences of Ur,
and her faith in God did not go unrewarded.
In time, she received a blessing
that she never could have anticipated.
Sarah’s faith in Jehovah
led to the birth of Isaac.
What made this blessing especially remarkable
is described for us at Hebrews 11:11, 12.
Let’s read those verses.
Hebrews chapter 11
lists a number of faithful servants of God.
Sarah is mentioned along with Abraham.
As we read starting in verse 11,
notice how the focus is on faith:
“By faith also Sarah received power
to conceive offspring,
“even when she was past the age,
“since she considered Him faithful
who made the promise.
“For this reason, from one man
who was as good as dead,
“there were born children,
as many as the stars of heaven in number
and as innumerable
as the sands by the seaside.”
So, what remarkable blessing
did Sarah receive as a result of her faith?
The “power to conceive offspring,
even when she was past the age,” it said.
But how specifically did she show faith?
She showed faith
because “she considered Him faithful
who had made the promise.”
Sarah had faith in Jehovah’s promise
that Abraham would become the father to many.
Abraham needed faith, but so did Sarah.
And because they both had such faith,
verse 12 says:
“For this reason, . . .
there were born children.”
Now, some might say,
‘But I recall from the Scriptures
that Sarah laughed when she heard
that she would give birth?’
True.
But was that because she lacked faith?
Not at all.
We read a moment ago
that Sarah considered Jehovah faithful.
In other words, she trusted him.
So, what happened?
Well, evidently, the thought
of giving birth at her age
struck her as being so unusual
that she could not hold back
from laughing to herself.
So while she was only all too human,
she was undeniably a woman of strong faith.
Years later, Sarah’s faith
in Jehovah’s promise concerning Isaac
moved her to speak up when 5-year-old Isaac
was persecuted, or bullied,
by 19-year-old Ishmael.
She saw a real threat
to the well-being of Isaac,
and her faith reminded her
that Isaac was more than just her son.
He was assigned a key role
in Jehovah’s purpose.
So she mustered up courage
and spoke up in his defense.
Strong faith helps us to do many things.
In the following dramatization,
take note of how a husband and wife
show faith like that of Abraham and Sarah.
Saying goodbye
is never easy.
And even though we were excited
about our new LDC assignment,
it was going to take us farther
than we’d ever been.
It wasn’t just a new routine;
it was a whole new way of life!
With each new move and project,
we thought about Sarah.
She focused on the good things ahead
and not on what she’d left behind.
And that’s what we tried to do.
Jehovah has been so good to us.
We didn’t always know
where the next project would take us,
but we did know that Jehovah would be with us
every step of the way.
As demonstrated in that video,
we can strengthen our faith
by meditating on Jehovah’s goodness
to his people in the past
and his goodness to his people today.
Take time to meditate
on how Jehovah has helped you
when you’ve made sacrifices in his service.
As the sister in the video stated,
‘Sarah focused on the good things ahead
and not on what she had left behind.’
We show faith like that of Sarah’s
when we support the decisions that are made
by God’s organization today.
Imitate Sarah’s faith,
and follow Jehovah’s direction closely.
When we are obedient to Jehovah’s direction,
then as Hebrews 13:17 states,
the brothers may carry out
their responsibilities
“with joy and not with sighing.”
For married sisters, this means
displaying a Sarah-like spirit
in their marriage.
A Christian wife respects
and supports her husband
in doing Jehovah’s will.
The apostle Peter wrote that such a spirit
has “great value in the eyes of God.”
What are some of the many ways
in which sisters today
display faith like Sarah’s?
Well, many Christian women of strong faith
are supportive of their husbands
in the circuit work.
Many others leave family behind
when accepting an assignment
from Local/Design Construction
or the School for Kingdom Evangelizers.
And many sisters serving at Bethel
do so far away from their families.
And this is true of single sisters as well.
All of these, and many more,
show Sarah-like faith
by trusting in Jehovah’s loving care
and making themselves available
in his service.
We are confident that Jehovah sees
these acts of faith.
Hebrews 13:16 says
that “God is well-pleased
with such sacrifices.”
So see their example,
and imitate their faith.
Brother James Mantz,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
will now present the next talk
in this symposium,
“Imitate Women of Strong Faith!—Rahab.”
Two Israelite men
sneak into the city of Jericho.
The men are spies.
They take refuge in a place
where they feel no one will notice them
—the home of a prostitute, Rahab.
And little does Rahab know
how the visit
of these two men will affect her life.
But someone recognizes the spies,
and they notify the king.
The king sends men
to take the spies into custody.
As the king’s men bang on the door,
Rahab is confronted
with a life-or-death decision
—a decision that will affect her livelihood
and the lives of everyone in her family.
Will she take a stand for Jehovah’s people,
or will she side with the king of Jericho?
As you watch the following video,
imagine the challenges that Rahab faced
and notice what helped her
to make a life-saving decision.
Jericho was doomed.
People were scared.
When the Israelite men showed up at my door,
there was barely time to think.
But I knew what was at stake.
Even as a young girl,
I had heard all the stories.
Jehovah wasn’t like the other gods.
He had dried up the waters of the Red Sea
and given his people victory
over the Amorites.
If I helped these men,
I knew Jehovah would help me.
For the first time in my life,
I was standing with Jehovah’s people
on Jehovah’s side.
And my faith was being rewarded.
The spies were probably
the first Israelites that Rahab had ever met.
Yet, she was convinced
that if she helped the two men,
Jehovah would help her.
Why did she feel that way?
Please open your Bibles
to Hebrews chapter 11,
and we’re going to read verse 31.
And here we find the answer
to that question in a single word.
Hebrews 11:31 says:
“By faith Rahab the prostitute
“did not perish
with those who acted disobediently,
because she received
the spies in a peaceable way.”
Yes, Rahab took a decisive stand
based on her faith
in what she had heard about Jehovah
—how he had delivered
his people at the Red Sea
and how he had given them
victories over nearby kings.
The account in Joshua chapter 2
describes the significant sequence of events.
Rahab had already hidden
the spies on her roof
before the king’s men arrived.
And after sending the king’s men away,
she went back up to the roof
to talk to the spies.
There she explained to them
the reasons for her faith,
and she expressed confidence
that Jehovah is the true God
and that Jehovah would give his people
victory over Jericho.
Only then did she ask
the spies for protection
for herself and her family.
So Rahab’s faith
was not based on the promise of a reward.
Rather, her faith
was based on her firm conviction
that Jehovah is the almighty God.
Rahab’s faith gave her courage
to hide and protect the spies.
And then her faith moved her
to obey the spies’ unusual instructions.
In the following dramatization,
notice how a young Bible student
shows faith like that of Rahab.
There was no doubt about it.
I had found the truth.
So why did I feel so anxious?
I knew how Mom felt about the holidays.
But I also learned how Jehovah felt.
They displease him.
Some changes in my life were easy to make.
But I really needed Jehovah’s help
for what I had to do next.
I love my mom so much.
When I explained that I wouldn’t celebrate
the holidays anymore,
I could tell that she was hurt.
But I knew I was doing the right thing
and prayed that Jehovah
would help her understand.
It is going to be
a holiday season like no other
—like this 36 megapixel DSLR camera kit
for just $399.
Or would you believe this 65” 4K UHD
Smart TV is only $849?
Hurry in before it’s gone because these . . .
I admit I was surprised when she said
she wanted to learn more.
What a blessing!
Thanks to Jehovah, I had found the truth,
and now maybe my family would find it too.
Like Rahab, this Bible student
had already identified the true God.
She was convinced
that she had found the truth.
But now she needed to act on that faith,
and she was blessed
when she took a stand on Jehovah’s side.
Each of us must ask ourselves,
‘Am I standing firmly on Jehovah’s side?’
Perhaps you feel that you
don’t have enough knowledge to take a stand.
If so, imitate Rahab and do not hesitate.
What little knowledge Rahab had about Jehovah
was enough to give her faith
that moved her
to take prompt, obedient action.
But Rahab had to do more than protect
the spies and follow their instructions.
James 2:25
states that Rahab was
“declared righteous by [her] works.”
Remember, she was a prostitute
—a work that is not in harmony
with Jehovah’s righteous standards.
The Canaanites didn’t view
prostitution as something bad.
However, in order to be accepted
as one of Jehovah’s clean worshippers,
Rahab had to abandon her immoral way of life.
Likewise today, all who want
to please Jehovah must abandon
any lifestyles or conduct
that displeases him.
This includes sexual immorality,
idolatry, theft, drunkenness,
and customs that are not in harmony
with the Scriptures.
Rahab and her family certainly were grateful
that her faithful actions
led to their salvation.
But that wasn’t all that Jehovah
did to bless this woman of strong faith.
She also had the privilege
of becoming an ancestress
of the Messiah, Jesus Christ.
Therefore, may all of us
imitate the faith of Rahab.
And may that faith move us to action
to abandon immoral conduct
and false religious customs,
to take our stand for Jehovah
and his pure worship,
to continue to grow in knowledge of God,
and to draw closer to him
as our loving, heavenly Father.
If we show faith like that of Rahab,
we will enjoy
Jehovah’s favor and blessing forever.
Brother Kenneth Flodin,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“Imitate Women of Strong Faith!—Hannah.”
In the third talk of this convention,
Brother Noumair asked:
‘Have you experienced financial setback?
‘Has your child faced peer pressure
[and, we could add, bullying] in school?
Do you have a life-threatening disease?’
We’d like to continue that list:
Do you face scorn from workmates?
Do you have a personality issue with someone?
Do family members taunt you?
Well, as we deal with various trials,
we might recall the words of Paul.
He said:
“The way I am aiming my blows
is so as not to be striking the air.”
Well, how do we counteract
the adversities of this system?
Please find 1 Samuel chapter 1.
Hannah had two adversities,
and they were like boom! boom!
—a one-two punch—
designed to drop her for the count.
The first one is in verse 2 of chapter 1:
“[Elkanah] had two wives;
one was named Hannah,
and the other was named Peninnah.”
Well, that’s polygamy.
And Peninnah loathed, she hated, Hannah.
Well, what was the second problem?
It continues:
“Peninnah had children,
but Hannah had no children.”
Hannah was barren.
And in that culture,
this was a bitter reproach for a woman.
Well, what was
devious, uncouth Peninnah really like?
Let’s read verse 6:
“Moreover, her rival wife
taunted her relentlessly
in order to upset her.”
She did this on purpose
“because Jehovah had not given her children.”
And look at the end of verse 7:
“Her rival would taunt her so much
that [Hannah] would weep and not eat.”
Well, as you watch the following artwork,
imagine Hannah’s distressing circumstance
and then how faith turned it all around.
I couldn’t sleep or eat.
I felt my hopes and dreams slipping away.
But even if no one else really understood me,
I knew Jehovah would.
I told him everything.
I knew that the “God of justice”
would set all matters right in his own time
and in his own way.
Jehovah answered my prayer
in such a wonderful way.
I never forgot
where this incredible blessing had come from.
“There is no rock like our God.”
Did you see the grief on Hannah’s face
in that first picture?
In the next piece of art,
she’s peaceful and tranquil,
and she’s voicing her faith
in Jehovah, her Rock.
From despair to calmness of heart,
how did that happen?
In verses 10 and 11,
she demonstrated faith in several ways.
And we can do the same as we face
our own boom! boom!
—one-two punch—
of trials and frustrations of life.
In verse 10:
“Hannah was extremely bitter,
“and she began to pray to Jehovah
and to weep uncontrollably.”
She was “extremely bitter,”
but she prayed.
She cried “uncontrollably,”
but she prayed to Jehovah.
In your agonizing circumstances,
no matter how agitated,
find a quiet place (if only in your mind)
and pour out your heart to Jehovah.
Well, how else did Hannah show her faith?
Well, in that very prayer,
she did ask Jehovah for a blessing.
But she also promised
to give him something in return.
In verse 11:
“And she made this vow:
“‘O Jehovah of armies,
“‘if you look
upon the affliction of your servant
“‘and remember me
and you do not forget your servant
“‘and give to your servant a male child,
“‘I will give him to Jehovah
all the days of his life,
and no razor will touch his head.’”
Yes, she was going to give her son
as a Nazirite from birth
to serve Jehovah all his days
—a sterling example of faith.
Well, what else
likely strengthened Hannah’s faith?
Examples of faithful women
who came before her
with similar circumstances.
Do you remember Rachel and her sister Leah?
They were both married to Jacob.
And like Hannah, Rachel had no children.
And there were issues
between the two because of this.
But you see,
Hannah could look back on that example
and see how Jehovah helped
faithful Rachel to prosper.
It bolstered her faith.
Well, what’s another way
that Hannah showed faith?
Well, despite being distraught
—so distraught that she “would weep”
and could “not eat”—
she continued her spiritual routine.
Verse 7 says that she would go
to the tabernacle faithfully
“year after year.”
In verses 13 through 16,
she was misjudged by the high priest,
but she continued her spiritual routine.
Now, as we said at the outset,
the punches that life throws at us
are different from Hannah’s,
but we too can have
the same strong faith that she did.
Now, in the following dramatization,
though the trial is different,
note how the sister
shows faith like that of Hannah.
I could tell from the doctor’s voice
that the news wasn’t good.
I just didn’t expect my health
to worsen so quickly.
I tried to act like everything was fine
—that I was fine,
but I wasn’t.
Praying to Jehovah,
just knowing he would listen and understand
—that’s what got me through.
No one really knew what I was going through,
not even my friends.
I felt like Hannah
—totally misunderstood.
But she had faith
that Jehovah would set matters straight.
And he did for Hannah and for me.
But more than that,
he reminded me that I wouldn’t have to deal
with this illness alone.
The sister’s circumstances were different,
but she drew strength
from Hannah’s strong faith in Jehovah.
No matter what the circumstances or trial,
how can we imitate the example of that faith?
Well, there are many different ways,
but let’s review a few.
First Peter 5:9
—Satan tries to beat us up
and knock us down,
but we’re not alone.
There are others
who experience the same trials
—1 Peter 5:9:
“But take your stand against him,
firm in the faith,
“knowing that the same kind of sufferings
are being experienced
by the entire association
of your brothers in the world.”
Reflect on Jehovah’s dealings
with other faithful ones,
both in the past and in the present day.
Now, at 1 Samuel 1:12,
it says that Hannah
“prayed for a long time before Jehovah.”
We too can gain relief
through fervent, persistent,
and specific prayers.
Colossians chapter 4 says:
“Persevere in prayer.”
When we pray to Jehovah,
leave it with him,
confident that he will help.
And recall
that “Hannah was extremely bitter.”
She was crying “uncontrollably.”
But after she
poured her feelings out to Jehovah,
verse 18 says:
“[She] went on her way and ate,
and her face was no longer downcast.”
And then after Jehovah acted in her behalf,
Hannah remembered that
and she went back to Jehovah in prayer
and prayed the beautiful prayer
in 1 Samuel chapter 2.
Finally, like Hannah, even if discouraged,
we need to maintain a good spiritual routine.
If we allow distress to paralyze us,
in effect we become
a stationary punching bag for Satan.
Stay nimble on your feet spiritually
—active in your theocratic routine.
And like Paul, aim your blows;
do not strike the air.
Fight back against Satan and his tactics.
If we do all these things,
our bond with Jehovah will grow ever stronger
and Jehovah will reward our faith
like he did for Hannah.
And now Brother Harold Corkern,
a helper to the Publishing Committee,
will present the next talk of this symposium,
“Imitate Women of Strong Faith!
—The Captive Israelite Girl.”
In the 11th century B.C.E.,
the nation of Syria
would often attack Israel,
capturing many and making many their slaves
—even children.
Notice how the Bible describes
one of these raids
in 2 Kings chapter 5.
Second Kings chapter 5, and in verse 1,
we are told that Naaman
was the army chief of the Syrians.
He was a mighty warrior,
but he was also very sick with leprosy.
But notice verse 2:
“On one of their raids,
“the Syrians had taken captive
from the land of Israel
a little girl who became
a servant to Naaman’s wife.”
Can you picture this little girl
being ripped away from her parents?
It was frightening for her.
She was taken to a strange land
with people that were intimidating,
and they worshipped many false gods.
In that very difficult circumstance,
how was this little girl
required to exercise strong faith?
Please note the answer to this question
in the following video.
I remember the day the soldiers took me away.
I had never felt more alone.
My home, my friends,
everything I knew was gone.
But I still had Jehovah.
The master of the house was very sick.
He was in pain.
Elisha could help him.
I had heard about Elisha’s miracles.
He had even raised the dead.
I knew Elisha could cure him,
and Jehovah gave me the courage to speak up.
Despite being away from her parents,
this little girl exercised strong faith.
Where did she get that faith?
Well, no doubt her parents had inculcated
love and trust for Jehovah in her.
But she also had things
that were happening in her lifetime
that would build her faith.
For example,
she would have known
about the miracles of the prophet Elisha
and how, with Jehovah’s spirit,
he performed many miracles,
including raising a little boy from the dead.
This little girl could have reasoned,
‘Why, if Jehovah
can raise a little boy from death,
he can certainly cure
my master from his disease.’
Well, what did she do
with this faith and trust?
She spoke up courageously.
Notice her words to her mistress
as recorded at 2 Kings 5:3:
“She said to her mistress:
“‘If only my lord would visit
the prophet in Samaria!
Then he would cure him of his leprosy.’”
Such boldness!
And because she spoke up,
Naaman went to Israel,
got in touch with Elisha the prophet,
humbled himself,
listened to the instructions,
and was completely cured of the leprosy.
But something else very important occurred.
Because of Naaman’s coming
to know about Jehovah,
what did he declare?
At 2 Kings 5:15, he said:
“Now I know that there is no God
anywhere in all the earth but in Israel.”
And Naaman also vowed
that he would never serve
any other god but Jehovah.
How happy Naaman and his entire household
was when he went home!
Not only was he cured of his leprosy
but now he was
a happy, joyful servant of Jehovah.
Well, it’s not just in Bible times
that good experiences
like this have occurred.
As you watch the following dramatization,
notice how one of our sisters
showed strong faith,
even under the most difficult
of circumstances.
I was taken from my home,
my husband,
and my spiritual family.
I was imprisoned for my faith.
It was another world.
It wasn’t easy staying strong.
Every time I asked for a Bible,
the answer was no.
But God’s Word was already in my heart.
So I did what I love the most;
I talked about God’s Kingdom.
Many of those I preached to
seemed cold at first,
but genuine love and the warmth of God’s Word
just seemed to melt their hearts.
Sometimes speaking up
took more courage than I thought I had,
but not more courage
than Jehovah could give me.
It was hard to look
beyond the locks and uniforms.
But God’s will is that “all sorts of people”
learn about him.
So I spoke about my God, Jehovah.
I knew that even behind prison bars,
Jehovah would give me the strength
to help others.
At this point, we’d like to address
our young ones in the audience.
You too can have strong faith
like the little Israelite girl
and tell others about Jehovah.
Remember the words of Romans 10:13, 14.
It is so important
that people know about Jehovah.
But how can they know about him
and gain salvation
if there’s no one to preach?
You too can become a bold
and faithful preacher of the good news.
How?
By taking in Bible truths
and building up strong faith in your heart,
and then you’ll be able to do
like our sister did in the dramatization.
Do you remember what she said?
‘I had God’s Word in my heart.
‘And as a result, even in prison
‘when I was surrounded
by all those difficulties,
‘I did what I love to do;
I talked about God’s Kingdom.’
Another thing you can do
is pray for more courage and faith.
Do you remember what our sister said?
‘It seemed that, at times,
to speak up required more courage than I had,
but not more courage
than Jehovah could give me.’
So dear young ones,
don’t be afraid to talk about Jehovah
and the truth to your schoolmates,
to your unbelieving relatives,
to your teachers.
Good results will happen.
For example, there is an experience
of a schoolteacher here in the United States
who had been searching
for the basic questions
as to the meaning of life,
but she could not find them.
But then a 12-year-old student at school
asked this teacher three questions.
The first question:
“Do you know
that I’m one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?”
“Yes.”
“Would you like to learn more
about Jehovah’s Witnesses?”
“Yes.”
The third question:
“Where do you live?”
Our 12-year-old sister
started a study with her teacher.
The teacher loved what she was hearing,
made excellent progress, and was baptized.
That sister, the former schoolteacher,
has been serving Jehovah now
for many decades.
In fact, for the last 40 years,
she has been serving as a member
of the United States Bethel family.
So blessings come
when we speak up and show strong faith.
Remember,
in the case of the little Israelite girl,
Naaman would have never gone to Israel
if she had not spoken up.
And as a result, he was cured,
but he also became a servant of Jehovah.
So in harmony with the strong faith
of that captive Israelite girl,
may Jehovah give all of us
the courage we need
to display our strong faith
even under the most stressful
and frightening circumstances.
Brother Geoffrey Jackson will now consider
the next talk of this symposium,
“Imitate Women of Strong Faith!
—Mary the Mother of Jesus.”
Jehovah chose the young woman Mary
for a difficult assignment.
It was a unique assignment,
one that required great faith.
It was to care for and raise
the only-begotten Son of God, Jesus Christ.
What an amazing privilege that was!
And yet, it required strong faith
on the part of Mary
not only because this was
a very serious responsibility
that would involve quite a number of years
but because initially Mary,
before accepting this assignment,
had some concerns, no doubt.
One of them would have been the concern
with regard to the reaction of her friends,
neighbors, relatives and, yes, of course,
her fiancé, Joseph.
After all, the angel didn’t say to her:
“Don’t worry.
“I’ll go and inform this
to all the ones involved
so that they don’t get upset.”
So it was a very difficult
and overwhelming assignment for Mary.
Can you imagine
how she approached this assignment?
Well, to help us do that,
let’s watch this short video.
I was engaged to marry Joseph.
I thought we would have
a simple and quiet life.
And then, suddenly, everything changed.
I know that God sometimes asks us
to do what is difficult.
But this seemed impossible,
beyond anything we could handle.
But I knew I was safe in Jehovah’s hands.
If we remained loyal to Him
and did our best
to care for his precious Son,
he would always be loyal to us
and give us what we needed.
Yes, when we think of Mary’s situation,
all that she was interested in was having
a quiet, simple life.
Then suddenly everything changed for her,
and it may have seemed impossible for her
to be able to accept that assignment.
And yet, what was her reaction?
Well, please take your Bibles,
and turn with me
to the first chapter of Luke and verse 38
—Luke 1:38.
There we see Mary’s reaction: “Look!
“Jehovah’s slave girl!
May it happen to me
according to your declaration.”
Yes, in full faith and with humility,
she accepted this difficult assignment.
She knew that Jehovah would be with her
and that he would help her.
But what was it that gave Mary
such a strong faith?
Well, we get a clue if we look down
in the same chapter but at verse 46.
So that’s Luke 1:46.
And we’re not going to read the verse
but the study note associated with the verse.
Notice it says: “Mary’s words of praise
“that follow in verses 46-55
“contain well over 20 references to
“or allusions to the Hebrew Scriptures . . .
“Mary’s words give evidence
of her spirituality
“and her knowledge of the Scriptures.
“They show her appreciative attitude.
“Her words also reveal
the depth of her faith,
“as she spoke of Jehovah as abasing
the haughty and powerful
and as helping the lowly and poor
who seek to serve him.”
Yes, Mary’s faith
was based on her knowledge of God’s Word,
of the Holy Scriptures that she had.
But it seems that she
didn’t have personal copies
of these writings.
Rather, she must have memorized
what she heard being read at the synagogue.
Isn’t that amazing?
So Mary’s heart was full
of all of these expressions
from the Hebrew Scriptures
—so much so that when
she spontaneously praised Jehovah,
all these expressions came out
because she had treasured them in her heart.
So, yes, Mary had strong faith
that was based on the Holy Writings,
and that is what made her qualified
for this assignment.
Well, what about us?
How can we imitate this strong faith of Mary?
As we look at this dramatization,
notice that although
our assignments may be different,
we likewise need to have
that same strong faith.
When they first told me,
I thought it must have been a mistake.
I mean, me
—oversee a department
at an international convention?
I felt like it was just too much to handle,
but I remembered that I thought
the same thing years ago
when I was asked to serve
on a Disaster Relief Committee
and when I served
on the Hospital Liaison Committee.
Actually, I’ve always felt that way
when I’ve received
an assignment from Jehovah.
But what I’ve learned is
that he’s always ready to help.
So when Jehovah asks me
to do something that seems difficult,
I just remind myself
to pray,
stay loyal,
and have faith
that he’ll give me what I need.
Did you feel sorry for that young brother?
Perhaps we can really understand
his expressions,
‘When they told me of the assignment,
I thought it was a mistake.’
No doubt some of us have felt
the same way at times too.
But what helped this young brother?
Well, he remembered how Jehovah
had helped him
in similar situations in the past.
Do you remember how he
thought back to the time
when he was with the Disaster Committee?
And there he was, standing as a young man,
and all these other men
were looking to him for some direction.
That was very overwhelming.
And then what about when he was
to make the presentation
as an HLC member?
Remember him sitting there
in the corridor by himself,
and then this young woman
ushers him into the room.
She didn’t look very friendly at all,
did she?
And certainly the medical staff
didn’t look very friendly.
So assignments like that can be overwhelming.
But what did the young brother say?
He said that the things
that helped him were prayer,
staying loyal, and having faith.
Yes, like Mary,
we likewise can have this strong faith
that pleases Jehovah.
We need to display humility
and have absolute confidence in Jehovah,
a type of confidence that’s expressed
in the book of Psalms.
Please turn with me
to Psalm 56:3, 4
—Psalm 56:3, 4.
“When I am afraid, I put my trust in you.
“In God
—whose word I praise—
“In God I put my trust; I am not afraid.
What can mere man do to me?”
Yes, just like the psalmist
and just like Mary,
we can have full confidence in Jehovah.
Yes, let us demonstrate this strong faith
when we are faced with difficult assignments,
trusting in Jehovah,
knowing that he will bless us
the same as he blessed Mary.
The next part in our symposium
will be handled by Brother Leonard Myers,
who’s a helper to the Writing Committee.
He’ll discuss the theme
“Imitate Women of Strong Faith!
—The Phoenician Woman.”
After the Passover of 32 C.E.,
Jesus and his disciples were
in Phoenicia of Syria,
north of the borders of Israel.
Even in this non-Israelite territory,
Jesus couldn’t escape notice.
Please open your Bibles to Matthew chapter 15
—and you may want to put
a place marker there—
Matthew chapter 15, starting in verse 22.
A Greek woman born in Phoenicia
found Jesus and begged him
to heal her daughter.
The verse says that the girl was
“cruelly demon possessed.”
Verse 23 says that Jesus did not say
a word in answer to the mother.
After a while, his disciples urged him:
“Send her away,
because she keeps crying out after us.”
The mother was persistent.
In response, Jesus explained his reason
for ignoring her in verse 24:
“I was not sent to anyone
except to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel.”
How would the woman respond?
Would Jesus’ seeming rejection
discourage her?
Would she lose faith?
In the following video, look for evidence
of the Phoenician woman’s
extraordinary faith.
No, I was not Jewish,
but I saw that this Jesus
was no ordinary man.
I had heard about his power to help others,
and my daughter was suffering.
I wouldn’t take no for an answer.
I couldn’t.
This man was from God.
There was nowhere else to turn.
I had faith in Jesus.
When he heard me, he said:
“Let it happen to you as you wish.”
And then it did!
My beautiful, precious daughter
was healthy and smiling again.
Because of her faith, the Phoenician woman
overcame the fear of prejudice
that could have prevented her
from approaching Jesus.
Remember, she was of Greek descent;
Jesus was Jewish.
But as stated in the video,
she heard reports of Jesus’ power
to help others
and she realized that this man was from God.
Notice in verse 22, she addressed Jesus
as “Lord, Son of David.”
She publicly acknowledged
that Jesus was the promised Messiah.
And even though at first
he didn’t respond to her
and then explained his reason for doing so,
she didn’t become discouraged.
Let’s continue with the account in verse 25
to see the strong faith of this woman:
“But the woman came
and did obeisance to him, saying:
‘Lord, help me!’”
How Jesus must have been moved
by the woman’s heartfelt appeal!
Apparently, though,
Jesus wanted to test her faith.
Like a parent who plans to grant
a child’s request
but doesn’t give an outward sign of that plan
in order to test the child’s seriousness,
notice what Jesus tells her in verse 26:
“It is not right to take the bread
of the children
and throw it to the little dogs.”
Among the Greeks and Romans,
the dog was often a beloved pet
that lived in its owner’s house
and played with the children.
The expression “little dogs,”
or perhaps a house dog,
might have reminded the woman
of a warm, endearing picture.
By likening the Israelites to children
and non-Jews to little dogs,
Jesus evidently wanted to indicate
an order of priority.
In a household with both children and dogs,
the children would be fed first.
So Jesus meant that he couldn’t care
for non-Israelites
at the expense of deserving Jews.
Rather than take offense, the woman
discerned the point of the illustration
and humbly stated in verse 27:
“Yes, Lord, but really the little dogs do eat
of the crumbs falling from the table
of their masters.”
What a beautiful response!
And what was the result
of the woman’s remarkable faith?
Verse 28:
“Then Jesus replied to her:
“‘O woman, great is your faith;
“let it happen to you as you wish.’
And her daughter was healed
from that hour on.”
The woman’s faith was rewarded
when Jesus healed her daughter.
What an example of strong faith!
In the following dramatization,
note how someone who has just started
to have a good relationship with God
might need to display strong faith
like that of the Phoenician woman.
I never thought it would happen.
I finally found what I’d been searching for
—a good relationship with God.
Then one day,
a coworker texted an article
that claimed to expose Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I was tempted to read it,
and then I thought back
to when I first met Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I was so excited about what they taught me
from the Bible
—that God’s name is Jehovah,
the Kingdom is a real government,
and so much more.
Why would I want to learn
about Jehovah’s Witnesses from their enemies?
But my friends?
Not so much.
I saw people who really loved one another.
It’s a real brotherhood.
But it wasn’t just the people.
This was the truth!
I didn’t need to learn
about Jehovah’s Witnesses from their enemies.
I had seen for myself
that they worship the true God, Jehovah.
Did you notice how the young man recognized
and put faith in Jehovah’s organization?
That was a protection,
so he wasn’t misled by lies from our enemies.
His faith might have reminded you
of the Phoenician woman.
Remember, she recognized and put faith
in Jehovah’s representative, his Son.
The question we need to consider is,
How can we imitate
the Phoenician woman’s strong faith?
Like that woman, we need to recognize
Jehovah’s representatives
and associate with them.
At Matthew 24:45,
Jesus identified these representatives.
He foretold that in our day he would use
“the faithful and discreet slave”
to provide
spiritual “food at the proper time.”
Why can we have strong faith
that the Governing Body is filling that role
of “the faithful and discreet slave”?
Consider three lines of evidence.
First, there’s evidence
of holy spirit guiding these brothers.
For example, holy spirit
has helped the Governing Body
to grasp Scriptural truths
not previously understood.
These brothers feel as the apostle Paul did,
who wrote at 1 Corinthians 2:13:
“These things we also speak,
not with words taught by human wisdom,
but with those taught by the spirit.”
Second, we see evidence
of angelic assistance.
The Governing Body has the immense task
of overseeing an international preaching work
involving over eight million evangelizers.
The overall growth of the preaching
and disciple-making work,
despite fierce opposition in some lands,
has been possible
only with superhuman assistance.
A third line of evidence
is reliance on God’s Word.
Some religions may revise teachings
in order to appease beliefs and opinions
of their members.
But our dear brothers of the Governing Body
allow their decisions to be guided
by God’s Word,
rather than popular opinion.
We can have strong faith
that Jehovah, through his Son,
is directing the Governing Body.
And we need to remain loyal
to these faithful brothers
and to Jehovah’s organization,
despite attempts by opposers
to discredit them.
What will be the outcome if we do?
Think back to the example
of the Phoenician woman.
Was she rewarded for her strong faith?
Yes—when her beloved daughter was healed.
Likewise, if you display strong faith
and follow the direction
of our Leader, Jesus,
he will lead you to everlasting life.
Brother William Malenfant,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now present the next talk
of this symposium,
“Imitate Women of Strong Faith!—Martha.”
“Martha, Martha”
—she was a hard-working, hospitable woman.
The Bible tells us that “Jesus loved Martha
and her sister [Mary]
and [their brother] Lazarus.”
When Lazarus took ill,
Martha surely did everything
in her power to soothe his discomfort.
She was so concerned
with her brother’s condition
that she and her sister,
Mary, sent a message to Jesus,
as recorded at John 11:3, saying:
“Lord, see!
the one for whom you have affection is sick.”
Martha knew that Lazarus was seriously ill.
She must have felt helpless
as Lazarus sank deeper
into his illness and then died.
What would Martha do?
Would she give in to despair,
and would grief overpower her
and weaken her faith?
As you watch the following video,
try to imagine Martha’s grief
when her brother died.
During those first few days,
everything was a blur.
My sister, Mary, and I
had never felt so empty and lost.
I knew that if our Lord had been here,
our brother would not have died.
But through the tears and the pain,
I had no doubt
that the resurrection was real,
that someday
—someday—
he would live again.
Who could have imagined
it could happen that very day
and right before our eyes?
We wept tears of joy
and thanked
our loving Father in heaven, Jehovah.
Empathy helps us to feel the pain
and the distress that Martha
felt when Lazarus died.
The Bible account tells us that Jesus
traveled to Bethany, where Martha lived,
but he did not arrive before Lazarus died.
In fact, he came four days
after Lazarus had died.
When Jesus met with Martha,
she expressed faith that Jesus
could have healed Lazarus,
and she felt that Jesus
might yet help her brother.
The Scriptures show that she also believed
in the future resurrection.
Martha must have been thinking
about miracles that Jesus had performed
and the people who had been healed by him.
And she had no doubt
that Jesus was the Christ
and that he could perform miracles.
Read with me what the Bible says
about Martha’s faith in the resurrection
and her confidence in Jesus.
It’s found at John 11:21-26.
It reads as follows:
“Martha then said to Jesus:
“‘Lord, if you had been here,
my brother would not have died.’”
She didn’t say this to reproach Jesus;
she merely stated a fact.
And then she goes on.
She says: “‘Yet even now
“‘I know that whatever you ask God for,
“God will give you.’
“Jesus said to her:
“‘Your brother will rise.’
“Martha said to him:
“‘I know he will rise
in the resurrection on the last day.’
“Jesus said to her:
“‘I am the resurrection and the life.
“‘The one who exercises faith in me,
“‘even though he dies, will come to life;
“‘and everyone who is living
and exercises faith in me
“‘will never die at all.
Do you believe this?’”
In verse 27,
Martha makes
one of the most important statements
that would ever pass her lips.
It reads: “She said to him,
“‘Yes, Lord, I have believed
that you are the Christ,
the Son of God,
the one coming into the world.’”
We can only imagine
how much her faith was appreciated by Jesus.
Jesus Christ has the same appreciation for us
as we show our faith in his promises.
In the following dramatization,
observe how a sister’s faith
brings her comfort.
When I lost my son,
I lost part of myself.
I tried to stay busy,
but everything felt empty.
In my darkest times,
Jehovah’s words brought me comfort.
Not a day goes by
that I don’t think about Brandon
—not just memories of how it was
but even more how wonderful it’ll be
to see him soon
in God’s new world.
We deeply sympathize
with the sister in the video
over the loss of her son
and with any in the congregation
who have suffered the loss of a loved one.
Did you take note
of how the sister imitated Martha’s faith
by putting her complete trust in Jehovah God
and going to him in prayer?
Like Martha,
we can build our faith in the resurrection
by carefully considering
all that God’s Word says about it.
Think of all the evidence there is
that Jesus was resurrected.
The Scriptures show clearly
that after his death and resurrection,
Jesus “showed himself alive”
to his disciples.
He also appeared to Saul of Tarsus,
who became the apostle Paul.
In his letter to the Corinthians,
Paul points out that “more than 500 brothers”
saw the resurrected Jesus.
And to show that it was not just hearsay,
Paul tells us that most
of those eyewitnesses were still alive
when he wrote to the Corinthians.
Yes, they were living witnesses
who could verify the fact
that Jesus was resurrected from the dead.
And think about the inspired
assurance that we have
at Revelation 21:3, 4
—that the time is coming
when “death will be no more.”
When you think about it,
who is it that declares
that “death will be no more”
at Revelation 21:3, 4?
None other than the resurrected Jesus Christ.
We do well to imitate Martha
by maintaining strong faith
when we face the loss of a loved one.
No, it’s not easy; it’s painful.
But we can do it,
knowing full well
that this life is not all there is.
All true Christians
must have faith in the resurrection
—faith that the dead will live again
and that death
will be done away with in God’s new world.
Jehovah and his Son
rewarded the faith of Martha,
Mary, and Lazarus.
We will be rewarded too
if we build strong faith like that of Martha.
Brother Gerrit Lösch,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now present
the final talk of this symposium,
“Imitate Women of Strong Faith!
—Modern-Day Examples.”
Over the years, there were
many sisters with outstanding faith.
Sister Matsue Ishii was one of them.
She was born in Japan in 1909.
Although she grew up in a Buddhist family,
she had a thirst for Bible knowledge.
In 1918, the Spanish flu hit her area
and she saw lots of coffins with dead bodies.
She and her elder sister
both also caught the Spanish flu,
and a week later, her sister died.
She wondered, ‘Why do people die,
and what happens to them at death?’
In 1928, when Matsue was 19,
her father arranged for her
to marry Jizo Ishii, a zealous Buddhist.
Matsue was introduced to the truth in Osaka
through the book The Harp of God.
That was given to her by a brother
who lived in a neighboring house
that belonged to the International Bible
Students Association.
Matsue was baptized in March 1929,
and her husband, Jizo,
was baptized a short time later.
In June 1939, when she was 30 years old,
she and her husband were arrested
and were separated from each other.
This certainly called for faith.
She said that she nearly died
when she was in solitary confinement
for almost a year.
Matsue was released
toward the end of 1944,
and she was reunited with Jizo
after World War II ended.
Both she and her husband
had remained faithful.
Let us now consider
another encouraging example.
Right after World War II ended,
far away from Japan,
in Estonia, northeastern Europe,
Ella Toom was introduced to the truth
in April 1945
and was baptized in August 1946,
at age 20.
She was arrested by the Communists
on December 27, 1950,
and sentenced to imprisonment.
She was sent
to a slave labor camp in Russia,
the infamous Vorkuta camp
above the Arctic Circle,
and later to other prison camps
250 miles, or 400 kilometers,
southeast of Moscow.
The sisters continued
to be spiritually-minded.
They made miniature copies
of The Watchtower
and put them inside bars of soap
and resealed the soap.
This certainly called for faith.
She did not have to serve for 13 years
but actually was released on May 4, 1956,
after five and a half years.
The year after,
she married Brother Lembit Toom.
However, the threat
of searches and arrests continued
until the preaching work
was legalized in Estonia in 1991.
In the following video,
note some other details
regarding the lives
of these two faithful women
—Matsue Ishii and Ella Toom.
For nearly a year,
I had been held in solitary confinement
in a tiny, filthy, bug-infested prison cell.
Five and a half years after my arrest,
I was released.
If we truly rely on Jehovah,
really love him
and cry out in our heart for his help,
just as he did not forsake me,
he will not forsake his servants.
They arrested me
and took me in for questioning.
An interrogator invited me to sign a document
stating that I would discontinue preaching.
I said, “I would rather live in prison
“with my relationship with God intact
than be free and lose his approval.”
My determination
has been to heed the Bible’s admonition:
“Trust in Jehovah and do good.”
I have learned that doing this
leads to receiving
“the requests of your heart.”
How did Sisters Ishii and Toom show faith?
Please turn with me to Psalm 37.
Sister Ishii had faith
that Jehovah would not abandon her,
in line with Psalm 37:25,
which reads:
“I was once young and now I am old,
“but I have not seen
any one righteous abandoned,
nor his children looking for bread.”
Her faith helped her
to endure difficult tests of integrity.
She was arrested on June 21, 1939,
and taken to a police station
and put into a dark cell
with soot hanging from the ceiling.
Thereafter, she was transferred
to another location
and put into solitary confinement.
Her husband was also arrested,
and she did not see him
until the war had ended.
‘I nearly died in that cell,’ she said.
But she was exposed to another test too.
When interrogated,
she found out from the officials
that Junzo Akashi,
the overseer of the Japan branch,
had abandoned the truth.
Sister Ishii replied:
“Akashi is only an imperfect human . . .
He is no longer my brother.”
Sister Ishii remained loyal.
Similarly, Sister Toom from Estonia
refused to compromise
or to abandon her faith.
She prayed and meditated on Bible principles
in order to endure,
like Psalm 119
and verses 97, 98 say:
“How I do love your law!
“I ponder over it all day long.
“Your commandment
makes me wiser than my enemies,
because it is with me forever.”
In 1949,
Ella Toom was arrested by the Communists.
They took her in for questioning.
She reports:
“Forced to remove all my clothing
“and [being watched]
by young police officers,
“I felt humiliated.
“Yet, after I prayed to Jehovah,
“peace and calmness of heart came over me.
“Next, I was put in a tiny cell,
“where I could not even lie down.
“I was taken out only for interrogations.
“The officers would say:
“‘We aren’t asking you
to deny the existence of God.
“‘Just stop your stupid preaching!
“You can have a promising future.’
“And they would threaten:
‘Do you want to live?
Or do you want to die with your God
on the fields of Siberia?’”
She said: “For three days,
I was prevented from falling asleep
“between the repeated interrogations.
“Meditation on Bible principles
helped me to endure.
“Finally, an interrogator
invited me to sign a document
“stating that I would discontinue preaching.
“‘I have given this matter much thought,’
I said,
“‘and I would rather live in prison
with my relationship with God intact
“than [to] be free and lose his approval.’
“At that the interrogator shouted:
“‘You fool!
All of you will be arrested
and sent to Siberia!’”
But she was unexpectedly set free
at midnight.
However, she was arrested again
sometime later.
In the following dramatization,
note how a brother shows faith
like that of Sisters Ishii and Toom.
As the world went from bad to worse,
I dug deeper into God’s Word.
I wanted to stay strong,
like so many
brothers and sisters in the past.
“Those who remained faithful
had no special abilities
“and were inconspicuous.
“Surely all of us
must always trust in Jehovah
with all our heart.”
I memorized scriptures.
I knew these words would build my faith
and give me the strength I needed
to face what was to come.
A new wave of arrests occurred this week
as local authorities enforce new restrictions
on Jehovah’s Witnesses.
This is coming just 14 days
after the Supreme Court’s ruling . . .
“Trust in Jehovah and do what is good;
“reside in the earth,
and act with faithfulness.
“Find exquisite delight in Jehovah,
and he will grant you
the desires of your heart.”
We had to be more discreet,
but we never stopped talking
about God’s Word.
We had to face many difficulties,
but with God’s Word embedded in our hearts,
we faithfully endured to the end.
How can you imitate the examples
discussed in this symposium?
How can you imitate Sarah?
Build faith by meditating
on Jehovah’s goodness to his people
and to you personally.
How can you imitate Rahab?
Take a firm stand for true worship,
even if you have
only a limited knowledge of the truth.
How can you imitate Hannah?
Build faith by taking note
of Jehovah’s answers to your prayers.
How can you imitate
the captive Israelite girl?
Young ones,
show faith by sharing the good news
with schoolmates, teachers,
and unbelieving family members.
You can also imitate
the mother of Jesus, Mary.
How?
Strengthen your faith, and trust in Jehovah.
Carefully examine the Scriptures
and meditate on them.
How can you imitate the Phoenician woman?
Recognize whom
Jehovah is using to do his will
and associate yourself with them.
How can you imitate Mary,
the sister of Lazarus?
Build faith by considering
all that God’s Word says
about his wonderful promises.
The Bible says:
“Mary . . . sat down at the feet of the Lord
and kept listening to what he was saying.”
How can you imitate Sisters Ishii and Toom?
Let the power of God’s Word
motivate you to endure faithfully.
When we clearly perceive
the “great cloud of witnesses
surrounding us,”
we can “run with endurance
the race that is set before us,”
as Hebrews 12:1 encourages us to do.
Like these faithful women,
we can all be included
in Jehovah’s “book of remembrance,”
as mentioned at Malachi 3:16,
and inherit everlasting blessings.
Thank you, brothers,
for those motivating talks.
May we always cherish faithful women,
just as Jehovah does.
Let’s sing together song number 142,
“Holding Fast to Our Hope.”
Again, that’s song number 142.